.Dd $Mdocdate: January 2 2020$
.Dt BLOG 1
.Os
.An crvs
.Aq crvs@crvs.xyz
.Sh NAME
.Nm blog
.Nd simple static website generator
.Sh SYNOPSYS
.Bl -tag -width blog -compact
.It Nm blog
.Nm make
.It Nm blog
.Nm deploy
.It Nm blog
.Nm template
.Oo
.Fl t Ar template
.Oc
.Oo
.Fl h Ar head-content 
.Oc
body-content
.It Nm blog
.Nm remake
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm blog
is a simple static website generator that is minimally configurable and is designed to not need much in the way of maintenance.
It comprises a total of three shell scripts
.Em blog-make 
.Em blog-deploy 
.Em blog-template 
where:
.Bl -tag -width "blog " -compact
.It Nm blog make
processes the markdown files (extension '.md') contained in the directories listed in 
.Em blogconfig
and places the output in a directory named
.Em cache
under the current workind directory.
It also produces the
.Em index
and
.Em tag
pages, as well as an
.Em RSS feed
which is stored in feed.xml.
.It Nm blog deploy
installs the contents of the website ('.html' files under the cache directory and any suplementary files or directories listed in 
.Em blogconfig )
under the destination directory (also configured in
.Em blogconfig )
with the correct permissions.
.It Nm blog template
is used to compile a markdown file into html using lowdown(1). It places the content of the file passed after the optional
.Fl h
flag into the head of the document, and uses the template passed to the optional
.Fl t
flag.
.It Nm blog remake
is used to force the remaking of every post (and index file) in the blog.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "cache/posts.db" -compact
.It Pa blogconfig
blog configuration file, must be present at the root of the worktree.
.It Pa cache
destination directory of the (locally) compiled static website.
.It Pa cache/posts.db
.Xr sqlite3 1
database containing the metadata associated to the blog posts that have been processed.
.El
.Sh FILE FORMAT
.Pa blogconfig
is a bare-bones yaml-style configuration file containing a minimal list of variables, which are.
.Bl -tag -width "destination:" -compact
.It blogtitle: 
The title of the blog which will be placed at the header of every subsequent page.
.It baseurl: 
The url of the blog.
.It postdirs:
A space separated list of directories which contain the markdown files that will be processed.
.It payloads: 
A space separated list of directories which contain files that should be hosted
.Em as-is .
.It destination:
The directory where the blog should be deployed to when running
.Nm blog deploy .
.El
.Pp
The blog posts to be rendered shall be written in markdown with file extension
.Em md
and placed within one of the directories named in the
.Em postdirs
line in the
.Em blogconfig
file.
Each post should contain a head section at the beginning of the file starting and ending by a line containing only a string of dashes "-".
The head section should have the following metadata:
.Bl -tag -width "modified:" -compact
.It Em title:
The title of the blog post being rendered.
.It Em tags:
Tags to identify/group this blog post by.
.It Em date:
The date in which the blog post is to be "published" (or rather authored).
.It Em modified:
The date at which it was last modified (optional).
.El 
Any other piece of metadata will be ignored.
.Sh EXAMPLE BLOGCONFIG
.Bd
.Dl blogtitle: my blog title
.Dl baseurl: https://my-url.com
.Dl postdirs: posts otherposts
.Dl payloads: files
.Dl destination: /var/www/htdocs
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLE POST
.Bd
.Dl ---
.Dl title: An example post
.Dl tags: exampletag useless
.Dl date: 2019-12-29
.Dl modified: 2019-12-30	 
.Dl ---

.Dl This is an example post of my [blog](index.html) where I also include an important [file](files/afile.png) which I had mentioned before in my [other blog post](posts_otherpost.html). You can read all my other useless posts [here](tag_useless.html)
.Ed
.Pp 
note that the linked file is in the directory
.Em files
which is explicitly mentioned in the 
.Em payloads
line in
.Em blogconfig.
Note also that to link to a blog post rendered from a markdown file named
.Em posts/name.md
you just have to link to
.Em posts_name.html ,
similarly to link to a specific tag named
.Em mytag ,
you just have to link to
.Em tag_mytag.html .
